---
layout: post
title:  "The Plan"
date:   2014-09-18 21:27:11
image: none
---

A lot has happened since [my last post](http://danwilson.co/2014/05/13/university.html). I’ve graduated from university with a 2:1, moved into an apartment in the centre of Manchester, and landed at job at [BJL](http://bjl.co.uk) as their frontend developer. All seems to be going well, but is that actually the case? Not quite.

You see, when I was at university I had a lot of free time to develop my skills and fulfil personal goals. Now I have a job, I feel like I have no time at all (which I know isn’t case, I’m just not using my time well). I feel as if my learning has stopped. Of course, I’m learning at work but it isn’t what I want to be learning. We make websites but I want to make web apps. And so the plan begins. 

I’ve set a goal to develop a set of web apps, mainly focused on fitness tracking (as that ties in with some personal goals), so I can continue to learn, and hone my developer skills. Each of the apps with be built using either the MEAN stack or Ruby on Rails, and maybe even a little Django. But the end goal is to get a framework locked down. All the code will be open sourced on my [GitHub](http://github.com/wilsonand1) upon completion and (more than likely) will be free to use. There's going to be no time frame on each one, unless I get ridiculous and take forever to complete anything. To go along side the build process of these application, I’d like to have a small development blog with each one where I can document my learnings.

Development on the first app is already underway and I hope to have something to show for it soon. 

Part 2 of the plan is iOS. I've always loved the idea of being an iOS developer but every time I try to learn Obj-c, I just fail. I've since bought [The Big Nerd Ranch](http://www.amazon.co.uk/iOS-Programming-Ranch-Guide-Guides/dp/0321942051/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1410819030&sr=1-1&keywords=big+nerd+ranch) book and would love to work through that. The aim is to make an iOS counterpart for each of the web apps I make. This is more of a long term goal and won’t be happening in the near future.

**So to summarise:**
1. Build cool shit
2. Get better
